---
title: "Evolution 200A"
author: "Gaurav Kandlikar"
output: html_document:
  toc: true
---

## Bob Wayne

### Admin
"Connecting genes to phenotypes"-  
Using capture arrays + resequencing to assess genetic basis of phenotypic variation  
Challenging cell lines from wild individuals/ gene editing  
Long term demography from genetic variation  

**Paper critiques**  
First paragraph- [Link to Nature's guide](http://faculty.washigton.edu/kate1/ESS_418/Class_Schedule_files/HandoutDay04.pdf)  

Then, fundamental problems- what's not so great about it from basic question perspective  

How to test the new ideas presented in the paper  

More in `wayne/critique_notes.doc`

### Intro to evolution  
The concept of evolution has changed since Darwin- matured into thinking about genotypic changes across time.  
A variety of sources of evidence have been used to develop the theories of evolution. The fact of evolution- that there was descent with modification- long predates Darwin. 

Four premises led Darwin to his theory of evolution-   
1. More individuals are born than can possibly survive;   
2. There will be a struggle for existence;     
3. There is some phenotypic variation among the individuals;  
4. So, the phenotypes that are better at reproducing will grow in proportion (i.e. evolution happens).  

At the time of Darwin, thinking was very typological- platonic ideals of species, with mistakes, not variation. Much of OOS is focused on anagenisis, rather than speciation per se.  

At the time of Darwin, there were a few key problems of 
1) No mechanism of inheritance;  
2) Gaps in geological records;  
3) Origin of complex structures.   

Post-Darwinian advances have included Mendel's work on particulate inheritence; Fischer, Mayr etc's pushing of theory forward; Motoo Kimura's neutral theory; modern discovery of abundant genetic variation.  

**Persistent problems**  
1. Evolution of sexual reproduction (two-fold cost);  
2. Imporatance of selection vs natural processes (selection leaves signal across genome, and many genes now seem to be under selection);  
3. Development (Evo-Devo)- how does substantial phenotypic change come about;  
4. Speciation;  
5. Unit of selection.  


------------
### 1 October 2015  

**Darwin's lines of evidence**  
1. Direct observation;  
2. Comparitive anatomy;  
3. Embryology/development;  
4. Biogeography;  
5. Fossil record;
6. Taxonomy.  

*Direct observation*  
- Peppered moths- a good example of a well studied system. Observational, naturally replicated experiments, replicated over time, etc.  
- Pesticide resistance/DDT.  

*Comparitive anatomy/Embryology and development*  
- Artificial selection in rock pigeons and dogs.  
- Phenotypic diversity in dogs may be generated by shifts in where allometric development is truncated (juvenilization/neoteny). Use of genomics in understanding canid evolution- cool story here.  
    Highest mtDNA diversity in East Asia- suggests the most ancient origin there. Domestication happened before agriculture - unique to dogs. Functional grouping in dogs has genetic basis, except "toy dogs" (vonHoldt 2010). This makes sense, no? Not sure why Wayne & co. did not expect this result. Genome-wide studies reveal information about bottlenecks, dating of origins, etc. Ancient DNA work has been done in dogs- kind of cool that we can see where modern dogs fall out relative to the ancient DNA (derived from skeletons). Wolves that are directly ancestral to modern dogs are probably not present today.  

*Biogeography*  
Continents tend to have organisms with similarities that likely arose through descent with modification. (Divergence)    
Continents also tend to have similar functional groups but with different body plans (eg herbivores). (Convergence)  
New/old world vultures are convergent- stork- and hawk-like ancestry, respectively.  
Island radiations were another key example of descent with modification- tenrecs & lemurs on Madagascar, finches on Galapagos and island honeycreepers in Hawaii are three classic examples.   
Clines- a third type of biogeographic evidence (change in phenotype with geography)  
Ring species later became a key model system.  

*Fossil record*  
- Fossils share phenotypes due to DWM;  
- There are differences between modern species and fossils- more DWM;  
- Transitional fossils show that things have changed according to environment;  
- Extinction necessitates a mechanism for generation of more diversity.  

Evolution of the mamalian middle ear- movement of bone from mandible to middle ear  

**The history of life is "bushy"**   
**Evolution represents diversification, not orthogenesis**. Distributions tend to become larger, variance changes with mean. 

*Embryology and Development*  
Darwin used this quite seriously. For a while, evolutionary biologists were all about recapitulation- embryos go through all previous life forms.  

*Taxonomy*  
Shared characteristics between organisms can only be explaiend by DWM.  

*Comparitive anatomy*  
Work by Cuvier showed that some structures were homologous- derived from shared ancestry; others, like bird and bat wings, were analogous (despite the individual structures, like the separate bones, being homologous).  
Vestigial structures are another example of why comparitive anatomy provided useful evidence about evolution. Some horses end up developing an extra toe because of incomplete gene suppression.  
Selection is constrained by contingency.  

----------

### 5 October 2015   

**Molecular Ecology**  
Adaptive and deleterious variation is a key frontier for mol ecol- how does selection change gene frequencies?

The field has a history in studying neutral markers to infer demographic processes- but there is now a shift to ecologically important genes- eg. how does selection drive local adaptation?  
Mol Ecology has been revolutionary in some fields- it used to be thought that birds are primarily monogamous, but genetic tests of egg clutches revealed the impacts of all sorts of extra-pair copulation, etc.  

Questions  
A) Individual relatedness and population pedigrees;  
B) Population variation, demography and gene flow;  
C) Phylogeography;  
D) Genetic basis of adaptation;  
E) Gene expression;  
F) ;  
G) ;  
H) Ancient DNA.  

*There are many potential problems*-  
Locus specific effects based on type of data (SNPs vs Allozymes vs Microsats, ...)  
Analytical models- assumptions are often broken  
Sampling issues- sample size and biases  
Methodological issues- cost? appropriate technique?  

mtDNA often used for species ID (Barcoding), assessing level of genetic polymorphism within and between populations.  
Microsats often used for individual ID, relatedness estimates, reconstructing pedigrees, census estimates and Ne, level of polymorphism within and between populations. Microsats problematic beyond intraspecific because of convergence in microsat #.  


**Individual based studies**   
*within group*:  pedigree, mating systems, inbreeding, reproductive success, parentage, and kinship  
Pedigree made for full population of Yellowstone wolves- basis for anything we can say about heritability. Dominance of genes determined this way- black coat was dominant in the wolf case. Ancestry of genes analyzed- black allele came from dogs and confers immunity against distemper. Disassortative mating between black and gray wolves revealed. Inbreeding was shown to be really rare and only occurred in extreme situations.   

*between group*:  inter-group relatedness, dispersal, inter-group interactions   
Can provide insight into conservation biology- population structure analysis of SaMo Mtn Lions showed that many individuals were killed due to density of individuals, not necessarily due to scarcity.  

**Population based studies**  
Genetic variation within population tells us sometihng about effective population size (Ne)- what is the impact of drift?  Demographic history of a population can also be estimated this way- bottlenecks? population expansions? selection?   
Genetic differentiation among populations- are there migrants from one population to another? Do migrants reproduce in new population? Allele differentiation, landscape genetics  
Rare alleles are very common- very similar to SAD in forests. Over time, stretches of homozygosity are broken up- this is also a function of effective size, so demographic history reconstructed this way (?) ([PSMC](http://lh3.github.io/2014/07/20/alternatives-to-psmc/)). 

**Landscape Genetics**  
Model genetic patterns across landscape as f(environmental parameters). Isolation by Distance is the crudest version of this- more distant populations have fewer migrants, so more differentiation with distance. But in some cases (e.g. migratory animals like wolves) geographical distance is less informative than environmetal dissimilarity (e.g. vegetation type). Genetic structure of wolves can be mapped onto vegetation type too. We can synthesize this approach with, MaxEnt to model the distribution of different ecotypes within a species. 

**Phylogeography**  
Landscape can structure genetics in a heirarchical way- this allows us to map distributions onto evolutionary histories of lineages. EG turtle beaches have distinct mt haplotypes- turtles are phylopatric.  

**Adaptive variation**  
Started off with MHC and neutral proxies. Modern studies usee genome wide studies, genome sequencing, and gene expression/epigenetics. When making chips of SNPs, we need to be careful about the population used for SNP discovery- what if there is a bias in the reference population? 

Selective sweep- variation is reduced at a given site. Determine candidate SNPs under selection by looking for SNPs with really high Fst values and something about homozygosity - figure out the latter. Then the genes identified as candidate can be subject to GO analysis to look for functional gene classes. 

Once we have candidate gene, there is a resequencing study. That gene and regulatory sequences are assayed in large populations - are there non-synonymous changes? Was the non-synonymous SNP and outlier within the gene?

Use of Crispr-cas9 into cell lines of wild populations to understand genetic/cellular consequences. seems cool but potentially limited- how can we really extend from the impacts in a cell line to full organisms? 

----------------

### 7 October 2015       
 
**Species and speciation**     
Linneaus's typological view of species- variation was imperfection in representation of the *type*. But of course, variation is critical to adaptation and as the raw material for evolutionary change.  
The *biological species concept* emphasizes variation and reproductive isolation- independent evolutionary lineages over time. Apart from admixture, mutation (variation) is species specific. This is difficult to test- what is "potential" to interbreed? Also can't apply to asexual organisms...!    

Anagenesis v Cladogenesis  
Hybrid speciation is very common in plants- 30-50% is the number BW uses. Phylogenies end up with many reticulations- Clarkia an example of this  
Repro Isolation can come about in two major ways: prezygotic (e.g. temporal, habitat, behavioural, mechanical, gametic isolation) and postzygotic (hybrd inviability, hybrid sterility, or hybrid breakdown).   

**Allopatric speciation** occurs when populations are geographically isolated and the lineages diverge enough (due to drift, selection, ...) so that they can no longer interbreed. This requires geography. This is likley to have really strong effects- founder effects, genetic drift, mutation accumulation, and selection.   
Tests for these can be straightforward:  
1) Long-separated allopatric populations should not be able to interbreed;   
Using allozyme differences as a proxy for genetic distance, Coyne and others showed that degree of pre- and post-zygotic isolation was positively correlated with genetic distance.  


2) Degree of Repro Isol should reflect divergence time of allopatric populations.  
Hybrids of two Arrow leaved Violet species are less fit than parental form --> reinforcement acts to select for the "ability" to "avoid" intraspecific mating. Flip is that sympatric pairs should have more prezygotic isolation than allopatric pair, since there is a higher cost of wasting gametes. 

Isolation barriers can form over different time scales- e.g. glaciers can operate over thousands of years. Bird differentiation does not match the last glacial patterns. Glacial refugia "more or less throughly debunked."  Land bridges/disappearance thereof can form geographic barriers. These can make predictions to test with genetic data.  

**Peripheral speciation model**- there is some central population of a species, but there are small peripheral populations at the outer boundry of the OK zone. This small population has little gene flow with central population --> the lineages diverge.  So 1) Founder effect, 2) Divergent selection, 3) Strong genetic drift in peripheral population, 4) "Genetic Revolution"-- more inbreeding, more homozygosity, ... Item 4) is not strongly supported by theory or data. Rice and Hostert 1993- Strong divergent selection in isolated lines may lead to evolution of reproductive isolation. Diet can influence speciation too- shown in 2010 PNAS paper for Drosophila.   

**Parapatric speciation**- 1) Species expands into new area across an environmental transition; 2_ New allele combinations are selected ; 3) Steep cline results (allele frequency changes across hybrid zones); 4) Selection acts against hybirds, Reinforcement happens. 

The width of hybrid zones is a modeled as $\frac{S}{h^{1/2}} = W$ where S is the standard deviation of the distance to which genes disperse in a generation (average distance between distance between reproducing offspring and its parent); h = selection coefficient against heterozygotes

In Manakin bird example, the yellow coloration is preferred by the white banded females, suggesting that the yellow will enter into the other species.  

**Speciation with gene flow**  
Admixture among populations is common at short and long scales. See Tom Smith's 1998 Science paper.  

**Tension/Hybrid Zones**- they follow Haldane's rule that "When in the offspring of two different animal races(spp) one sex is rare, absent or sterile, that sex is the heterogametic sex"   
There is an alternative "Recessive allele theory"- exposure of deleterious recessive alleles in X chromosome of males causes sterility/decreased viability. Genes w/ the greatest effect on hybrid sterility tend to be X-linked.  

**Sympatric speciation** - speciation when individuals are physically capable of encountering each other with some liklihood.  
Consider a simple model:  
1) A balanced polymorphism is maintained by disruptive selection (eg white vs peppered moth by trees);  
2) Selective difference between the two ecotypes is large;  
3) Habitat selection is imposed by birth place or birth time or other ecological factor (e.g. some bias in  where eggs are laid);  
4) Then, speciation can occur.  

Race formation in apple maggot is a remarkable example of sympatric sppn. Maggots migrated from Hawthorne apple to domesticated apples and sour cherry- but emergence times changed with the different tree phenologies. There is assortative mating, and emergence time is heritable.  

Speciation in Rift lake Cichlids- allopatric or sympatric? Early studies suggested recent MRCA but there may have been isolated pools when the lakes last dried 10k years ago, so may have happpend allopatrically...  When this was done in Crater lakes of Cameroon. These lakes are small so things should be "able" to get around. All the cichlids in these lakes all shared a common MRCA that they did not share with any species outside the lake. 

**New and Exciting**  
1. Speciation genes;   
2. Divergence with gene flow;  
3. Sympatric speciation models and tests;  
4. Epigenetics. 

**Conservation genetics and the new molecular age**  
What aspects of the genome are adaptive/deleterious? What populations are in most trouble due to accumulation of crappy changes? The goal should be to preserve adaptive variation/adaptive potential.     

1. Effect of habitat fragmentation- bigger impact of drift in small populations, gene flow no longer occurring, genetics units lost.  
2. Hybridization with invasive species- domesticated salmon send genes into wild populations; wolf-dog hybrids!  Killer bees in texas- hybrids of American with killer African bees. 


----------------------------

### 12 October 2015

Preservation of adaptive diversity maximizes probability that successful genotypes will be around. Identification of populations with lots of deleterious mutation is helping identify populations that might be at hightened risk.  

**Genetic biodiversity**   
Its role within populations (predicting changes in heterozygosity, allelic diversity, impact of inbreeding). etc  
Differentiation between populations- habitat fragmentation impacts gene flow  
Identifying adaptive and deliterious changes.  

Genetic diversity ~ f(variatbility)-- allelic diversity; heterozygosity;    
Genetic diversity ~ f(distribution)-- geographic distribution; frequency;    
Genetic diversity ~ f(function)-- neutral vs adaptive changes;    
  Neutral changes are only impacted by drift- can tell us something about demographic past; Adaptive changes can be impacted both by drift and selection.  
  
Threats to genetic biodiversity:   
- genetic effects of habitat loss/fragmentation (decreased pop size, decreased variability, lower gene flow)   
Conservation of biodiversity is important in an uncertain world -   
  1. any variation can be the basis for adaptive responses.  
  2. Prevention of decline in fitness associated w loss of variability and inbreeding.   
      hole in heart of female Florida Pumas, failure of male sperm, malformed tail (just an effectt of inbreeding)   
      - this population was "genetically rescued" by Texan females brought in  
      - lots of abnormal behaviour... parent killed offspring, siblings killed siblings. "inverse Allee effect??"    
  3. Utilitarian need for humans
  
Demography can affect genetics:  
  - Founder effects can drive decreases in heterozygosity    
  - Genetic drift can exacerbate these effects... Selection is inefficient- a very high selection coefficient is required to be super high to weed out deleterious mutations --> overall decrease in fitness.     
  - Inbreeding is unavoidable...   
      - two randomly selected alleles more likely to be identical by descent than expected in a randomly breeding population    
      - higher homozygosity --> deleterious recessive mutations mroe likely to have phenotypic impacts   
      - juvenile mortality of inbred population is pretty much always higher than that of outbred populations.  
Extinction vortex  - Gilpin & Soule's paradigm applied to small populations.    
- Theory predicts that variability reduces as a function of $1/2N_{e}$
- But data show that N = 16 population has decrease in heterozygosity you'd expect out of N = 9 population. We can try to model these deviations from expectation using estimates of things like sex bias.  EG if there are only 2 males that mate with 35 females, $N_{e}$ = 7.6   $Ne = 4NfNm/(Nm+Nf)$    
- Variation in number of offspring is also important - large packs, but only one or two do all the breeding (e.g. in wild dog - large #s needed for pack) $Ne = (4n-2)/(Var+2)$    
When there is l-v pred-prey dynamics (or other cycling), harmonic mean is a better estimate of effective size than arithmatic mean- depression of Ne.   
Heterozygosity can be estimated and projected very easily.  (1/2n per generations)

"50/500 rule" of mutational meltdown- to preserve a species, 50 individuals should be captured and the population grown to 500.  
Any finite population loses heterozygosity- unavoidable consequence.   
Allelic diversity drops rapidly- this is what leads to a decrease in heterozygosity.  
Inbreeding coefficient rises with times- this can be done simplistically by assuming HWE and calculating deviation due only to inbreeding.  
Depression in fitness is generally approximately equal to inbreeding coefficient.  


**Populations are connected by gene flow**    
Fst is a function of effective size and migration rates. Very small number of migrants can "cancel out" differentition by drift- 1 migrant/generation.   
Fst also increases with distance. But the slop of the function is a function of the behaviour of the animals in question. Differentitation slower in widely moving species like wolves than in species that don't move very much- eg bighorn sheep  
structure+Fst can be used to estiimate differentiation and also migration rates- caught in one population but are assigned to another population. But the observed Fst's were too high.... the migrants weren't reproducing or exchanging genes with their new friends.  

Genetic exchangability- the factor that define the limits of spread of new genetic varients.  
Ecological exchangability- 

Phenotypic variance can be decomposed into genetic and environmantal variance.  
h^2_b = Vg/Vp

h^2_n = only additive effects of the genes are considered