---
output: pdf_document
fontsize: 11pt
geometry: margin=1in
---
\begin{center}\large{Summary \& Critique of Albertin et al. 2015}\end{center}

The morphology and behavior of soft-bodied cephalopods like the octopus are strikingly different from the basic mollusk body plan. The authors sought to explore the genomic basis for these complex anatomical and biochemical features. They generated and annotated the whole genome of *Octopus bimaculoides* and profiled the expression patterns in 12 tissues using RNA-seq. One hypothesis to explain the biological complexity of cephalopods posited that a whole-genome duplication event had driven genomic novelty, as having redundant genes "allows" a lineage to accumulate variation in the extra copies. However, the genetic architecture of *O. bimaculoides* does not support this hypothesis, as any duplication would need to be followed by extensive gene loss. The transcripts suggested that the octopus may instead introduce genetic variation by extensively editing mRNA. The researchers also sought to understand the development of the cephalopod's highly complex nervous system. At least two classes of genes were overrepresented in the octopus genome: the C2H2 transcription factors and Protocadherins, which are cell-cell adhesion proteins that are known to be overexpressed in vertebrate nervous systems. The authors hypothesize that the C2H2 zinc finger nucleases may provide the DNA-binding specificity required to generate the remarkable diversity of cell types, such as the suckers, nervous cells, etc. RNA-seq also revealed a great deal of tissue-specific gene expression, especially in the skin, suckers and nervous system, which is in line with the complexity of these structures. Interestingly, a class of transposons appeared to be highly overexpressed in neural tissue, which is in line with previous research linking learning to transposon expression. This analysis suggests that expansion of protocadherin and C2H2 ZFNs genes, transposon-mediated rearrangement, and tissue-specific gene expression have driven the dramatic shift in morphology and behavior in *O. bimaculoides* relative to other mollusks. 

This seems to be a fantastic paper that explores an interesting question and reveals an exciting answer. I greatly appreciated the setup to this paper- the predictions about genome architecture seem to all make a lot of sense, and the hypotheses were clearly laid out. One issue was that some of the results were not explained in the context of octopus function- but I am not sure whether this is due to a lack of understanding in the field overall or a shortcome of this study. For instance, it is not clear to me why we might expect a functional driver of the link between transposon expression and learning, or whether this correlation is an accident of genomic architecture. Here the authors wave their hands over an explanation and suggest that either the transposons or the genes could be the drivers of this pattern, but I wish that a hypothesis for a mechanism was offered. The authors also report that neurotransmitter diversity of lophotrochozoans appears to be comprable to that of mammals, but the expectations here are not clear to me. Do we expect certain neurotransmitters (e.g. acetylcholine, which has been implicated in memory formation) to be more diverse or at a higher abundance in organisms with greater "learning" capacity?  

A number of interesting questions arise from this study. It is fascinating to learn that RNA editing may be a strong driver of molecular diversity in these organsisms. I wonder how pervasive this pattern is - if indeed RNA editing drives variation across lineages, then the completeness of GWAS studies of SNPs may be called into question, as the same genome can give rise to distinct phenotypes. Indeed, between epigenetics, RNA editing, and alternate splicing, it seems that these "rapid-response" mechanisms may be even more important than genomic changes in allowing organisms to adapt to novel environments. I am excited to see where this field goes, especially as we work on better conservation strategies. I would also be interested in learning whether the protocadherins that were found to be overexpressed in the octopus are morphologically similar to those in mammalian models. As these proteins mediate very fundamental cellular interactions, it may be that there has been convergence in this structure. This might yield some insight into the question about the "repeatability" of evolution- here it appears that a complex molecular pathway was repeatedly followed in distinct lineages. 