---
title: "Summary and critique of Fumagalli et al. 2015"
output: pdf_document
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
---

Inuits in Greenland have for many thousands of years lived in extremely cold environments and with a diet exceptionally high in $\omega$-3 poly-unsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). This stressful lifestyle is likely to impose strong selective pressures that leave a signature in the Inuit genome. For instance, the high levels of $\omega$-3 fatty acids in the Inuit diet may select for lower levels of fatty acid biosynthesis in the human body. Clearly documenting this pattern would also provide early evidence for the role of adaptive evolution in human populations. Here, the researchers used two approaches to test for evidence of selection. First, the allele of 191 Inuit individuals at SNPs previously linked to cardiometabolic phenotypes were scored using a MetaboChip. Second, the researchers looked for evidence of selection in 18 Inuit exomes. All metrics were computed by comparing Inuit genomes to reference European and Han Chinese genomes using the population branch statistic. A region of Chromosome 11 that codes for a series of three faty acid desaturase (FADS) genes has been under strong selection in the Inuit genome. Derived alleles at multiple SNPs appear to be associated with variation in height, with the derived allele having an effect size of ~1cm. Though effect sizes in Europeans are not quite as strong, they are in the same direction. This effect may be modulated through the impact of PUFA levels on growth hormone synthesis. This is strong evidence of adaptive evolution in humans, and suggests that environment has shaped a major role in shaping the human genome.


On the whole, I foudnt this to be compelling evidence that Inuits have adapted to their environment at a genetic level. The physiological links between the FADS genes under selection and the diet, as well as the putative pathway for fatty acid profile to influence height, seem like compelling evidence. However, I worry about the phenotype data used for both the GWAS and the 18 individual exome study. There are two reasons to question the validity and the generalizability of this data. First is, of course, the sample size of 18 for the exome study- the phenotype of these 18 may show spurrious correlations to the SNPs assayed. For instance, a subset of these 18 may be native to a region of Greenland with a more restrictive diet that leads to shorter heights, and where the derrived allele is present at high frequency due to drift. Second, the study does not  address the fact that many Inuit populations are experiencing major shifts in diet over the past few generations that hare been linked to a rise in type 2 diabetes (Moltke et al. 2014). If the individuals included in this study have experienced these same changes, then links between any genetic adaptations to the native diet and observed phenotype may be hidden, and false associations may be appear. 

I would also have liked to see some discussion of the potential role of TBX15 and WARS2, which were identified as high PBS regions in Fig 1, in the cold-climate adaptation. The paper simply states that polymorphisms in the latter are linked to changes in waist:hip ratio and that GI populations might be lower. It was disappointing to see no follow-up to this- some discussion of why there may be selection pressure on this phenotype (or if it might be linked to others) would have been helpful. The PBS values of these regions are comprable to those of the FADS genes in the MetaboChip study, so the lack of discussion is disappointing. 

This study suggests many compelling lines for future research. Understanding the genetic links between FADS genes, growth hormone biosynthesis, and height would help elucidate the mechanism by which QTLs impact emergent phenotypes in humans and potentially other organisms. One way to do this might be to study the whole genome rather than just the exons, as non-coding regions that control expression of coding regions can have large impacts on phenotype. For instance, it may be possible that Inuit genome has been selected to have weaker promoters for FADS genes, and that these promoters also influence expression of growth hormones or other developmental controls. This study also may also inspire some biochemical questions- for example, future research may investigate how fatty acids feed into the endocrine system. Although some hormones are sterol derivatives, both human growth hormone and the insulin-like growth factor cited in this paper are peptide hormones, so fatty acids may control their expression via signalling pathways. Finally, I would be excited to see future studies investigate the degree of phenotypic plasticity in these genes. As regional diets blend into a "global"" diet (speaking from personal experience- I grew up eating a typical Southern Indian diet characterized by lots of rice and vegetables, and now have a more or less "American" diet), it will be important to understand how our genetics influence our health. 


---

Moltke et al. 2014. Nature. A common Greenlandic TBC1D4 variant confers muscle insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. 