---
title: "Summary and critique of Losos et al. 1997"
output: pdf_document
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
---

Phenotypic traits of small populations colonizing new habitats are predicted to shift relative to their source population. Two processes may drive this shift: first, phenotypes may adaptively shift in response to novel selection pressures, and second, genetic bottlenecks and the stronger effects of genetic drift on small populations may cause the colonizing population to posses a different genetic structure than the source. This paper reports the first experimental test of phenotypic shifts following colonizations. Small populations of *Anolis sagrei* were moved from a source population on Staniel Cay to fourteen islands and resurveyed after ten years. During this period, the phenotypes of colonizing populations had shifted to match their new environments. The degree of phenotypic change was correlated to the environmental distance from the source island, and the direction of the changes matched hypotheses derived from *Anolis* function. This shows that populations can adaptively respond to novel environments in only a few generations. These rapid shifts may form the basis for ecological speciation and explain the diversity of some taxa in highly variable environments. 

The authors conclude this paper with two thoughts: first, that the adaptive phenotypic shifts observed here may be the drivers of the remarkable *Anolis* diversity in the Caribbean, and second, that the phenotypic shifts may not be driven by genetics, but rather by shifts during development. Until the second point is clarified, it is hasty to draw conclusions about the role of environmental variation in driving speciation in this system. Reproductive isolation is fundamentally necessary for speciation, and there is no evidence for barriers to mating presented here. Even showing that genetics underly the reduction in hind leg length would not be a sufficient demonstration of possible speciation, as it would tell us nothing about the presence or absence of reproductive isolation. Another (less substantial) omission from this paper is a nuanced discussion of Figure 1a. The authors discuss the potential role of colonizer population size on genetic structure, but fail to discuss the differences between the 5- and 10- individual initial populations. Figure 1a of this manuscript potentially suggests that the centroid of the 10 individual populations may be closer to that of the source than the centroid of the n = 5 population. 

Future work should test whether the observed decrease in hind leg length is genetic or due to phenotypic plasticity and variation in development. If the shifts are shown to be genetically driven, subsequent work should investigate whether there are barriers to reproduction between the island populations. For example, individuals from a given island may preferentially mate with others from the same island. Reproductive isolation may also arise if species have different mating phenologies (e.g. mate in response to different environmental cues) or if shifts in hind leg morphology are linked to changes in reproductive morphology. Alternatively, a population genetic study can assess the degree of gene flow between islands to test for reproductive isolation. To address the question of population size impacts, future studies may benefit from using two vastly different initial population sizes (e.g. 5 and 50). If genetic drift is playing a major role in phenotypic divergence, we might expect the populations started with 5 individuals to be further from the source populations that those started with 50. 
