---
output: pdf_document
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
---
\begin{center}\large{Summary \& Critique of Palumbi et al. 2014}\end{center}

Coral reefs have recently experienced dramatic declines due to coral bleaching in warm-water exposures during which the corals lose their algae symbionts. While many populations show severe decline, some populations appear to be tolerant of these warm pulses and retain their algae. In this study, the group sought to investigate the molecular basis of thermal tolerance in coral using reefs of *Acropora hyacinthus* growing in backreef pools in American Samoa. Some populations live in a highly variable thermal environment (swings of 6\textdegree C per day, max temps of 35\textdegree C) which would be expected to cause bleaching (HV pools). The authors performed a series of experiments to determine the evolutionary and expression differences between these and the corals living in nearby pools experiencing less variation (MV pools). In the main experiment, corals from HV were transplanted into MV pools, and vice-versa. MV origin corals transplanted into HV showed a marked increase in thermal tolerance after several months, but were not as tolerant as the HV natives. HV natives planted into MV pools showed a drop in thermal tolerance, and their final performance matched that of MV natives. Using RNA-seq, the researchers showed that many genes were differentially expressed in corals treated in normal vs higher temperatures, suggesting a strong role for acclimation. On the other hand, many genes were differentially expressed in corals originating in HV vs MV pools, suggesting a strong role for local adaptation. To determine the relative contribution of acclimation vs fixed effects (e.g. adpatation, epigenetics), the researchers computed a factor *I*, which  is a function of the phenotypic difference between coral population in different environments. This factor can be broken down into contribution of acclimation and adaptation. This analysis suggested that a large portion of the phenotypic change could be attributed to rapid acclimation of MV corals to HV environments and vice versa. The contribution of acclimation and fixed effects were almost equivalent, suggesting that shifting expression can help corals tolerate novel environments as much as evolutionary responses. This suggests that *A. hyacinthus* populations may be well suited to  survive in warming oceans. However, the researchers caution that acclimation enough may not allow for the persistence of all corals. 

This study is a great application of transcriptomics, and the results seem to reveal a novel and under appreciated aspect of evolutionary adaptation to variable environments. It also hints back at the idea from conservation genomics that *adaptive potential* should be the target of more conservation efforts- in this context, it seems that contemporary HV pool populations may make ideal targets of conservation due to their higher constitutive expression of the 71 HV-adapted genes. However, as a purely *evolutionary* study this study is lacking in some ways. It is important to know whether the HV pools have been experiencing the higher temperature maxima and more dramatic swings for many generations, or whether this is a recent phenomenon. If it is the former, it may be that HV-origin corals are genetically unique populations that need to be preserved. If, however, the HV pools have only been "HV" for a few years, then it may be that the HV phenotype will soon be achieved in the MV-origin corals transplanted into HV pools. Since the authors say they measured sensitivity at 12, 19 and 27 months, I would have liked to see a "time-series" of the responses. It may be that the expression profiles and phenotypes of MV-origin corals in HV-pools got increasingly similar to the HV-origin corals over time. I would also have liked to see some discussion in this paper regarding the difference between immediate and long-term transcriptomic responses to warm temperature, and how that impacts adaptation. In the 2014 PNAS paper, the corals were subject to a 72hr warm treatment, and whereas in the field experiment, the conditions experienced by the corals may not have been as dramatic- for example, they may have experienced more variation right away in the field, which "prepared" them for higher average temperatures. 

This study raises many questions about the response of coral ecosystems to climate change. To me the most obvious question here is about the generalizability of this result. I would be curious to know whether other coral species have the same "high-variance" and "medium-variance" populations as *A. hyacinthus* does- if this is a phenomenon unique to this species or to the Ofu backreefs, then this result may not mean very much for the health of corals globally. So, I would like to investigate the distribution of temperature ranges that other species experience. For acclimation or adaptation to contribute to persistence of *A. hyacinthus*, the dispersal of corals is also an important factor- local adaptation to HV will not help in MV sites if the HV coral never reach other pools. Spatial ecology is a challenging field, and it might be rewarding to work out how corals (and sessile species) will physically move to keep up with the rapidly changing climate. Another interesting follow-up question would be to further break down the $I_{F}$ term into the effects of adaptation, epigenetics, and developmental constraints. If the HV origin coral have higher constitutive expression of TNFR-related proteins due to the environment in which they developed, it may be possible that coral developing in warmer waters are more capable of thriving in it. In that case, dispersal may be less relevant to this system. 