---
output: pdf_document
fontsize: 11pt
geometry: margin=1in
---

\begin{center}\large{Summary and Critique of Romiguer et al.}\end{center}

Population genetic theory predicts that the level of neutral genetic diversity within a population is a function of the mutation rate and the effective population size. However, emperical estimates of genetic diversity have largely failed to find this pattern, potentially because demographic history of populations can also have a strong effect on their levels of diversity. In this paper, Romiguer et al. report that the neutral genetic diversity of 76 animal species is well predicted by the species' life history traits. Propagule size was found to be the best predictor of the level of a species' neutral diversity, and adding other life history-related traits improved the predictions. In general, species with shorter life spans and higher reproductive rates (i.e. an $r-selected$ lifestyle) tended to have more genetic diversity than large-bodied species with longer life spans. The paper also reports that long-lived species tend to have higher values of $\pi_{n} / \pi_{s}$ than shorter-lived species. These results have a few implications for conservation genomics- first, there may be a number of small-bodied species with low levels of diversity that are ill preprared to adapt to rapidly changing environments. Second, there may be a number of species that maintain high levels of variation despite bottlenecks, so assaying neutral diversity is not enough to estiamate extinction risk.  

I appreciate the simplicity of some of the statistical analyses in this paper, but I think that it could have benefited from some more subtle approaches. For instance, I would have liked to see some sort of model selection approach used in place of the multiple regression that showed that six life history traits combined to explain 73% of the variance in $\pi_{s}$. Similarly, the authors report the relationship in fig 2B (\\PiS\\ ~ Adult size, $r^{2} = 0.07$, $P < 0.05$) as a positive result, but earlier report a relationship between \\PiS\\ and Max GPS distance with the same $r^{2}$ and $P$ as a negative result. This sort of selective fishing for $P-values$ is disheartenening! Statistical concerns aside, I was thrown off that "synonymous" changes in expressed mRNA were counted as "neutral" sites for the entire study. My understanding of this is that even though the wobble base is mostly synonymous in terms of amino acid mapping, there are documented codon biases that show that those loci are non-neutral (admittedly, this understanding comes from an old undergrad genetics course, so who knows where the field is now!). If indeed the so-called neutral sites in this study are not-strictly-neutral, this might explain part of the result that low-diversity taxa range in size from 1cm to 1m- perhaps it is selection that is reducing diversity. 