---
output: pdf_document
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
---
\begin{center}\large{Summary \& Critique of Soria-Carrasco et al. 2014}\end{center}

Natural selection can drive parallel speciation, in which multiple pairs of ecotypes of a given species diverge in the sam way due to similar selection regimes. The genomic basis of these parallel speciation events remains unclear. Early studies of *Anopheles* mosquitoes showed that three genomic regions were divergent between pairs of ecotypes (Turner et al. 2005). This result suggested the existence of "genomic islands of speciation," which presumably contain key genes that are under selection during speciation. This study sought to determine the genetic basis of divergence in multiple pairs of stick insect (*Timema cristinae*) populations. At each site, there are populations of the stick insect living on *Adenostoma* and *Ceanothus* plant hosts, and these populations show evidence of reproductive isolation. The researchers first assembled and annotated a reference genome, and resequenced 160 individuals from four sites where the two ecotypes live in close proximity. They then computed divergence ($F_{ST}$) values for all SNPs and tested whether the same loci show evidence of selection (high $F_{ST}$) across multiple ecotype pairs. 83% of the SNPs showing evidence of selection only showed that evidence in one population pair, suggesting that for the most part, the ecotypes were differentiating based on distinct SNPs. The researchers then did a reciprocal transplant experiment to test whether allele frequency of *Adenostoma* ecotypes changed when grown on *Ceanothus*, and vice-versa. The experiment confirmed that the frequency of allele frequency of high $F_{ST}$ loci changed as expected over one generation. The researchers used GO analyses to show that loci showing evidence of selection in >1 population pair are enriched for genes involved in calcium- and metal-ion binding. These results suggest that parallel speciation in this stick-insect is based primarily on distinct genomic loci, but that loci being selected in multiple populations likely have strong phenotypic effects. This suggests that the "genomic island of speciation" hypothesis may not hold in other systems, and that speciation may be an idiosyncratic process.

I think this was a very well designed and executed study: the combination of genomics and field experiment provide strong evidence that the 13% of the loci identified as being under selection in multiple pairs are indeed important to driving speciation in this system. Admittedly, the experiment would have benefited from larger samples and more generational replicates. There are two pieces of data that I think would be interesting to lay the foundation for this work. First, it would be interesting to do phenotypic analysis of the ecotype pairs among regions. There was some description of change in size, etc., but future studies ought to do more subtle phenotyping (e.g. metabolomics, chemical profiling) of the stick insects. It may be the case that even when the *Adenostoma* ecotype is experiencing similar pressures across sites, the populations are responding in subtly different ways, which would support the genomic data presented here. The second omission here is discussion about the percentage of loci we would expect to have high $F_{ST}$ across sites, and how 13% compares to this expectation. Figure 2 compares observed data to a null model, but I would have liked to see discussion of other biological reasons why a locus might show evidence of divergence in multiple populations. I  admit that I don't know much about this field, but the repeated mentions of processes other than selection driving genomic patterns suggests to me that there could be other things going on.  

This study opens the door to a lot of exciting research. Within the stick insect system, it would be nice to do chemical profiling of both the insects and their host plants to test whether there is an environmental driver of the divergence in calcium and metal ion binding genes between the populations. It would also be interesting to pursue the ~900 SNPs that show evidence of divergence in all four population pairs - do these genes confer strong advantages to the different ecotypes? And if so, are the SNPs with high divergence in two or three populations simply being swept with the loci divergent in all four pairs? As cheaper sequencing makes it cheaper to replicate this sort of study in more parallel speciation events, I think it will be fascinating to do comparative analyses of the findings. For instance, it may be that Turner et al.'s 2005 study on Anopheles found "genomic islands" simply because a smaller genome in that species means that all regions of selection are clustered onto fewer chromosomes. Conversely, speciation in organisms with large genomes may be driven by selection at a diversity of sites.

Turner, T., et al. 2005. PLOS Biology. Genomic Islands of Speciation in Anopheles gambiae. 